Nic: Hi, I'm Nic Steenhout, and this is
The Work Between. In
case you didn't know, I provide
transcripts reviewed for accuracy
by a human for every episode at the time
of publishing. There's
a text-only transcript that you could read
if audio isn't the
best media for you. There's also a timed
transcript you can follow
along while listening if that works better
for you. You can
access those directly on the podcast's
website if they aren't
displayed by your podcast aggregator.
That's theworkbetween
show. Before I get into what the show is,
I want to
say whose land it's made on. This podcast
is recorded on the
traditional, ancestral, and unceded
territory of the Stó:lō
Coast Salish people. The people of the
river, whose presence in
the Fraser Valley stretches back thousands
of years. I name this
territory because it belongs with what
this show is about
The ways we decide whose lives are valued,
whose work is taken
seriously, and whose experiences are
treated as problems to be
managed. Those decisions shape everything.
This show sits
inside that. This is, was, and always will
be First Nations
land. That's not a formality. It's
consistent with everything
I, and this show, stand for. Róisín Curé
is an urban sketcher
author, and teacher based in Galway, on
the west coast of
Ireland. She came to urban sketching in
2012 and built a
practice around capturing everyday and
natural scences in
ink and watercolor. She teaches sketching
worldwide through
online classes, a sketch club, and
in-person workshops across
Europe. She has published
illustrated books including An Urban
Sketcher's Galway. She has
recently launched Wild Atlantic Ink, a
monthly hand-drawn comic
rooted in the wildlife landscape and
stories of her corner of
Ireland. We spoke about identity and how
she identifies as a
comic artist, about the relationship
between sketching
and mental health, about the pros and cons
of sketching from
life rather than from photos, and we even
spoke briefly about
foraging and cooking. Hello, Róisín. Thank
you for joining me
on my show. I was really excited that you
accepted the
invitation because I'm a little bit
starstruck, I have to
say. So thank you for joining
Róisín: Delighted. Delighted to be here,
Nic. Thanks for
inviting me
Nic: For those of us who don't know you,
can you tell me in a
few words, what is it you do? What's your
creative practice
Róisín: My creative practice has suddenly
taken a new turn, and I
am now officially identifying as a comics
creator. So
I've struggled. You mentioned earlier that
the podcast will
discuss themes of identity as an artist
and creative identity
and it's always been baffling to me how I
couldn't identify, I
couldn't put a label on what I do. And I
would try out lots of
labels in my head and none of them seem to
fit. But I'm a
comic, I'm a comics creator, and that fits
just fine
Nic: Comics creator
Róisín: I'm a comics creator
Nic: What kind of comics? I grew up with
Tintin and Spirou and
all the classic Franco-Belgian ones
Róisín: My comics are like, I've only done
one episode, and I'm
just getting issue two to print. And it is
like as if Hergé met
David Attenborough, and we're driving in a
clown car together
That's a good description. Nic: Okay.
Róisín: I've got the Ligne Claire of
Hergé, and I have the Passion for Nature
of David
Attenborough, and the clown car is because
I cannot be serious
Nic: I want to read that
Róisín: You're going to love it
Nic: Yeah, I'm sure I will. I have a bit
of a passion for
nature. I have several creative practices.
I sketch, I
quilt, and I do bird photography
Róisín: Oh, wow. Nic: And
I'm privileged enough to live five minutes
from where the
bald eagle migration comes through every
year. So between
November and early January, I drive five
minutes, and I can see
hundreds of bald eagles in one spot.
Róisín: Amazing. Nic: So this is just like
yeah, it is amazing. It's like
mind-blowing. You know, how are
we so lucky to have this? And at the same
time
Róisín: I live on an estuary, and my land
backs onto an
estuary. I am also privileged to have just
discovered the Merlin app, and I'm
extremely privileged to have
a lovely son who likes to walk with me
early in the morning. He
does not like me listening to the birds
all the time, but I am
just enchanted by the combination of
Merlin app and the
bird life. I was just saying to my husband
earlier today, this
summer I am enjoying the birds more than I
ever have in all my
years, because I'm suddenly very, very
conscious of them due
to just listening out for them, really.
And on our estuary, we
just have everything. They all love our
estuary, and
it's a very out-of-the-way, undisturbed,
unspoiled natural
paradise. So it's just perfect
Nic: That's wonderful. I assume you sketch
those birds once in a
while
Róisín: Well, this will make you laugh,
Nic. First of all, I've
only just discovered the Merlin app, so I
haven't really been
conscious of birds. We've been walking
parallel to each other
without being aware of each other's
presence for, you know
50 something years, I suppose. But I was
putting them into my
first issue of my comic. So I used the
Merlin app to draw
them. There's photographs of the birds and
I copied them. I
mean, how how bad is that? I did not sit
there with my
binoculars and my sketchbook. I looked at
my phone
screenshotted the ones I'd heard. I drew
them from the
photos that the app supplied. Nic: Right.
Róisín: But I'm hoping that I used to be
very much a purist. If it if it wasn't in
front of me, it didn't
get drawn. But I've changed. Now I feel I
don't care what
source it is, if it's my mind, if it's a
photo. Obviously, I
work from life all the time as well. But
now it's about the art
for the first time, not about the source
Nic: This this is fascinating because I am
not directly
involved with the urban sketching
movement. But I have
attended a few events and obviously I've
read the books
and all that. And of course, it's it's
always we draw on location. Yeah. And
for me, who's come to art later, I've only
been drawing for about
five years. Doing it on location is
extremely difficult because I
don't have muscle memory on how do I draw
a face? How do I get
the perspective right? And... I've tried
and tried and tried, and I
beat myself up because I hate the results.
I feel I'm not
progressing. I'm feeling like backwards.
So I've I've done a
lot of thinking around, well, maybe using
photos isn't so bad
because. Róisín: No
it's it's it's I'm sorry to interrupt you,
Nic. No
it's not. I know it seems challenging to
draw on location
but actually you've got much more
information on location
than you do from photo. You can see more
clearly what's
challenging is the fact that they move,
the fact that they
leave, the fact that the light changes.
But those things
counterintuitively actually become
benefits because they
force you to just draw whatever you can.
And you're no longer
obsessed about getting it right or wrong
because there is no time
to obsess about getting it right or wrong.
And like that, there's
no such thing as drawing a face, drawing a
tree. There's
only seing there's only seing and drawing
what you see. And
when I when I teach people to draw, I say.
It makes no
difference whether you're drawing a heap
of rocks or a
human face in terms of the actual
technique you use
Drawing is drawing, looking is looking. It
really does not
matter what the subject matter is, except
that some don't move
and some do. And other than that, it's all
the same thing
Nic: So you giving yourself permission to
draw from photos
how does that tie in then? Because you've
done all the hard
work
Róisín: Yeah, yeah, yeah. You could say
that you could say
that I've done all the work I've been
outside and, you know
inside. But drawing, drawing what I see in
front of me, I'm not
going to say daily, but not that far off
daily for the last 12
or 14 years. And before that, I wasn't an
urban
sketcher, but I've been drawing regularly
since I was about, I
don't know, four or five, the usual young
kid age. And I
didn't stop. I drew all the way through my
always. So I'm not
I'm not going to go to the urban
sketching, you know, I'm not
going to go to an urban sketching meet up
and start
drawing from my head or from photos. But
yeah, I've I've put in the groundwork and
my comic is, for example
it's got a story about a seal who lives on
the coast. And
every time I draw his little rock pool
that he lives in, I'm
remembering the way the reflections go
when I draw the
sky darkening at night and the sunset. I'm
remembering how I've
drawn that. So many, many times I've drawn
wet sand when he
meets, he meets another seal on the wet
sand at dawn. Well, I
know how that looks because I've drawn it
so many times, not
a seal on the wet sand, you know, so my
drawings are very
much informed. And you say muscle memory,
I've got bags of
muscle memory now and I'm so glad. It's
like it's like you've
been driving all your life and somebody
asks you to go and
drive in a racetrack. And it's a really
tricky racetrack. But
you're like, yeah, I can do that. I've
done it a million
times. I'm comfortable with my car. I'm
comfortable with the
way the road bends, comfortable with any
surprises that might
come up along the way. I'm used to it.
I've done it. So that's
that's where I'm coming from in that way
Nic: How did you find the racetrack? How
did you get from what
you were doing to doing cartoons and
identifying yourself as a
comic artist
Róisín: I've been a comic artist since I
was I mean, I was I
was a Tintin obsessive. So, I mean, I've
read I don't know
I've read three biographies on Hergé. I
was looking for the
secret to his beautiful line and his
incredible mastery. And I
really wanted to find out the secret. Now
we're going back
We're going back twenty five years plus
now, and eventually I worked out
by myself what the secret was, which was
that... He wasn't that
great when he started, but he was always a
great storyteller
but he wasn't that accomplished as an
artist. He was OK, but
he wasn't what he became. And then he
worked on Le Petit Vingtième
every had to had to produce a comic every
single Friday
without excuse, without fail. And he did
that for ten years
And I began to and then I also discovered
that he had a team
and I thought, oh, oh, he had a team. Nic:
Oh, OK. Róisín: So it's not just
Hergé, it's Hergé and his team. But I
realized that just by sheer
volume of output, he became a master. And
as I say, he had to
bring it every single Friday. He had to
produce the goods and he
had a team. So I was comforted by that.
And I thought, OK, it's
it's possible through sheer dedication and
practice because
I was always very technically able, but
nothing like that
nothing like that. And then. And then. So
I was a comic artist
all my life. I've always been the one to
to make people around me
laugh through my drawings. I've always
done that. I've done
comic strip series of my friends who never
had any boyfriends
And then it was me who never had any
boyfriends. And then it was
there was always something for me to draw
a comic strip about
and on social media. And so when I joined
social media in
2013, I quickly realized that the public
had no interest
whatsoever in any of my funny stuff. So I
just didn't bother
putting it there. And it was something I
just did for my
family to make to make my family laugh.
And, you know, we
share a sense of humor. So it was always
great fun. And then
I've been doing this nonstop ever since.
It was just a little
private pleasure I had. And then it was
something that was always
an ambition of mine. But life goes on. The
years go by and
you think, you know, I'm very happy with
what I'm doing. I'm
very lucky the way things have worked out.
I've done very well
I've had lots of these creative platforms
that people could only
could never even have dreamt of in time
gone by. And
I've had them all. And I live in the
middle of nowhere.And I'm a
mom who stayed at home to raise the
children. And yet I got the
breaks because of social media. So I felt
very grateful. But
then about three months ago, I came across
a woman who had
started doing a comic and it's been very
successful for her
She's had viral success she's bringing in
a very decent wage
every month because of the success of the
comic and I
thought oh my god that's what I want to do
that's that's what
I can do. I can I can do this I can make a
comic because I've been
making little booklets of all sorts for
years
self-publishing. I've got some traditional
traditionally
published books out but didn't really want
to do that anymore
And then I couldn't remember who she was
you know the way in
social media if you don't make a record of
it it's gone
There's no way you're going to find it.
Nic: Yep. Róisín: And then my younger
daughter introduced me to um you know
Gemini. So I said to
Gemini so I'm looking for this cartoonist,
this this comics creator and
I don't know her name but she's bringing
in $14,000 a month
because I was trying to give facts and
figures she is she
was interviewed by a newspaper but I don't
know which one and
little lady. And I
was able to find her and I thought oh my
goodness I've
got a medium-sized audience small to
medium-sized audience
I'm going to give this a try
And with that I started drawing. I started
planning and
then it was like the floodgates opened the
idea started coming
through and at the same time as this
happened this is the
really strange thing how things come
together. When the time is
right... um I follow a guru from San
Diego, a fantastic man called
Pat Flynn really fantastic guy and he
sometime in November
December he said right on January the 12th
we're all going
to do one reel and a short a YouTube short
every single day
one minute long from one month. So I was
like I wouldn't mind
doing that, yeah that's a good idea I
think I can do that and
it was going to start on January the 12th.
And on January the
12th in the morning I said to my
husband... I said this is the
day I'm supposed to start but I don't know
what I'm going to do
I have no idea. I haven't planned it so I
thought well
nothing to lose nobody's paying me. Nobody
cares whether I do it
or not so do whatever you want. Which is
always a great
way to start any creative endeavor and I
had been drawing
the little um animals from my area my
beautiful part of Galway
where I live. And make believe animal well
they're real
animals but they're... They all walk on
two feet and they've
got like 18th century clothes and you know
they're they it's
centered around the ruins of a manor house
a few years ago. And I thought well I'm
this I'm going to do this I'm going to do
this. And I thought well I'd like to do
that so I
started drawing them and one thing led to
another and I
started being able... I... A story began
to form which had never
happened for me never been able to write
fiction. um And suddenly
here was a world that had just opened up
in front of me. This
this this this personality who began to
take on
a life of his own and I suddenly found I
had plenty in
the tank
um Yeah
and that was great and I was like oh my
god I've
discovered my illustration stroke
storytelling mojo. And
then when I saw the comics lady about a
month and a half ago I
was like oh my god I can put them all in a
comic I can put
them in the comic. I can have a story in
the comic. I can do
something on the flora and fauna I can do
the birds. I can
do a recipe I can go and gather wood. I
can do a lot of things. I can do a lot of
things I can do a lot of weeds and make
food out of it
because I've always done that and I was
like oh my god and I
haven't left my studio since. I'm here you
know six in the
morning so I don't know how long it'll
last before I fall
over with exhaustion but so far so good
Nic: And you're about to release the first
one
Róisín: I've done the first one the first
one I printed 400
copies I have about um let me see I have
about 80%, 70% of
them left but I fully expected that um and
I'm perfectly happy
I'm going to lose so much money on this
venture but I don't
care because this is my artistic
expression. um and you
know... You you put you you paint in your
studio and you you you put your
work up in a gallery and you don't second
guess the audience
If you do well that's a mistake in my
opinion. So this
is the same thing I'm just making it. I am
certainly not
second guessing the audience but I'm going
to... I'm just pleasing myself and
that's always a good start
Nic: So one of the questions I often ask
is do you do art for
yourself or do you do art for others? And
this sounds like
almost like you're doing it for yourself
without really caring
for the audience
Róisín: I'm not I don't I I tell you what
my father my father
he left us in November, and my father and
I were very close
And he used to always say to me he had a
horror of being bored
This was his terrible fear and he,
whenever I said to him dad I'm
working on a new book, he'd say is it
boring? I say well uh I I I
hope not. He said just don't let it be
boring. Don't be
boring okay right I'll do my best. So that
in that sense I try to please
the audience I really don't want the
audience to be bored
They're giving me their time, they're
giving me their money
so it's my responsibility to make sure
they're not bored. um So
I want to give them value and also I
canvassed my wonderful
students. And I asked them... I told them
about my comic I was
planning and one of my students is a real
straight
talker. And she said okay Róisín what is
the value for me
when I buy your comic and I was like um...
Oh gosh well so I
said there'll be maps. She's like okay I
like maps. Maps
are good. And I said they're... There'll
be recipes. She said uh-huh
okay that's good. But it she really helped
me to keep that
front and center in my mind. Give them
value and above all
make sure they're not bored. So but within
that you can really
please yourself. You can you can draw the
recipes just how
you want to. You can you can present them
exactly how you
think they should be presented and
every... Every page I approach
is is a playground. It's a 100% playground
how am I going to
present this, what would this creature
say, what would what
would, be how do these colors look
together, do the colors... Do
they harmonize? And I have on occasion
thrown whole pages away
because I didn't I didn't do myself
justice you know. So
I'm I'm trying to really do my best. This
is my this is my
exhibition this is my art gallery because
I don't ever
put any work up on a wall
Nic: Someone asked me recently if I could
do a portrait of
themselves and I said sure I can give it a
go. I don't
promise anything but I can give it a go.
And then they said
well you know if I don't like it you can
always do revisions
And I had to say well you know I am using
actual ink and
actual watercolor on actual paper it's not
like Procreate
I
can't do an undo. And you saying you're
throwing out whole
pages is a little bit like that right? For
those who listen in
that don't understand we're we're talking
about actual physical
art not digital art
draw everything by hand. Every time I draw
a speech bubble, I
draw a speech bubble and I draw little
track lines with a pencil
to make sure that the lines are nice and
neat. And if I change
my mind about what they've what they're
going to say I draw a
new speech bubble with new track lines. If
my hand if I'm too
eager and my hand smudges the ink before
it's dry, I have to
draw a new speech bubble. Sometimes the
shape isn't quite
right but the writing is perfect and I've
said exactly
what I want to say so I go ahead and scan
it and then I
clean it up and then I remove the
background. I might adjust
the scale. I drop it in. I layer my work.
I use graphics program
to layer to flatten images, to erase
things. But everything
everything is created by hand and then
it's manipulated on the
screen
Nic: That's an interesting process. Tell
more it works. Róisín: It's fantastic I
I'm thinking I'm giving a course
next May in Greece May 27 and it's going
to be um illustrated
vacationing journaling. And I'm going to
teach them how to use
the graphics program because it's free.
It's GIMP, it's open
source. It's GIMP and I did not... For the
first time I did
not ask my son and my husband. Well my
husband would just say
he's busy but my son, I did not ask my son
to install it for me
I did it all on my own, which is amazing
for me. So if I can do
it anyone can do it. And it's very
powerful. I've only used a
hundredth of what's available on it. And
if I can't do something I
google how to do it, and if I still can't
do it I go and ask
my son and he's he's brilliant at it. He
showed me... So um for
example I... In the coming issue I have um
one of my owls is getting
used to his new quarters his new aviary
and I wanted to show
the grill um you know the bars in front of
the aviary because at
one point he, the little owl I mean... It
was so adorable he
flew over to me and he hung on to the the
the wires with his two little
talons and his two... He let his two wings
dangle down like he
looked like a giant white feathery fly. It
was so sweet
and he's only a baby. He's only he's only
a couple of months
old and uh he stood there with his two
little feet and his wings
hanging down and I, of course, I had to do
the grill because
otherwise what's he hanging on to. So I
did the grill. I it
worked really well and uh it looked it
looked just right but it was
much too dark. It was black. I used black
ink for it I should
have used gray and uh when I put it in
front of the the drawing of
the owl it just it was really... um It was
really
interfering with the drawings of the owls.
So I was trying to... I
was trying to adjust the opacity of the
grill but I didn't
really know what what what it was called.
I mean that's how bad I am. I
thought is it the gradient? Is the
transparency? What do you
call this? So I tottered over to my son
and he said it's the
opacity and suddenly he showed me how to
adjust the opacity so
I was able to drop the grill on the owls
but this time
they were nice and pale gray. And I could
test different
opacities to see what was a good balance
between you know not
being too dark and being too light. So I
love the fact that I
can manipulate very key elements of design
like that. um Now my
The only problem is my eyes get very
tired. I'm on a MacBook
Air. It's very small screen and I probably
should get a bigger
a bigger a bigger laptop but... um So the
result is my eyes are
extremely tired at night time but that's
okay. I mean you
just have to take lots of breaks you know.
I have a dog
and the dog loves to chase a ball so
Nic: Yes uh my dog is hard to sleep on my
feet right now and
Róisín: Oh lovely
Yeah. You mentioned Hergé and uh I'm gonna
share a an anecdote
from my life when I was very young. I
think I was 10, 11
There was in Montreal an exhibit for
Hergé, a retrospective of
his work and um my cousin and I we were
talking and we were
saying oh wouldn't it be great if Tintin
had an adventure in
Quebec. And um there and then we sat down
and we wrote a letter
to Hergé saying "hey why don't you have an
adventure of
Tintin au Québec"? And uh somehow the
people the journalists that
were there um filmed us writing this
letter uh to to Hergé. We were
sitting in a corner of the museum and the
letter made it
to him somehow. And we got a response. So
uh somewhere in my
mother's archives there is a letter from
Hergé saying "hey this
is a wonderful idea and maybe Tintin will
come to Quebec right
now but I'm busy working on a new
project", which was his last
one that was never published because he
died. And then you
know I think it's the Alph-Art. So so yeah
that's that's my
connection to
Hergé. That's amazing
yeah
that's amazing. Well I have an anecdote
about Hergé as
well. Indirect and this is a very sad
story. I lived in
Paris in the early 1990s and um I was
living a very miserable
lonely life. I had a really bad boyfriend
who I really should
not have been hanging around with at all.
It was a real
problem and I was trying to get away but I
didn't have a job
and I was at the mercy of his largesse. So
it was not a good
situation I was trying to get jobs and I
was being taken care of. And I was turned
down here, there, and everywhere and then
I saw a job
drawing Tintin cartoons with a studio in
Paris. I thought oh
well I can do that and I went for my
little trial and I drew
some Tintin cartoons and I drew better
than I'd ever drawn
before. But in retrospect I don't think
they were that good
to be honest but they were but they were
better than I'd drawn
normally so I really was sure that I had a
chance. Anyway I
didn't get the job and um a very nice
manager told me that... It
wasn't a manager, he was a sub manager or
something... He told me
he'd been trying to get a woman on his
team for 10 years and he
had yet to succeed. He said they just
aren't going to hire women
So that kind of made it better because it
felt like it wasn't
really my fault. I couldn't do anything
about it but... um that's my
sad Hergé story. And I cried and cried and
cried and then I
went to see um Green Card with the Gérard
Depardieu and it was
really funny and it cheered me up so it
wasn't too bad
Nic: Yeah. Part of my show is is talking
about disability
and art and before we started recording I
I pointed out I know
you don't identify as disabled. You're not
disabled but in
reading your blogs, listening to some
other interviews you've
done, there's there's been a a running
thread I think where
you speak a lot about melancholy and uh
you've used word
like taming the demons and brain worms and
all that so I
think that those themes fit in within the
context of of disability
in at a stretch. But um one thing that I
was really interesting in
hearing is how sketching for you is
letting you quiet your mind
Can you tell me a little bit more about
that
Róisín: Yes I I'd be very happy to um I I
was... I mean that that example
of what I just told you in Paris, that was
just very normal
for me. I mean that was just my my lot in
life. That I would you
know frequently be absolutely miserable,
you know, and it
didn't have to be because I was alone in
another city. It could
be anywhere. It could be in company. It
could be alone. I come
from a very big family but it was no
guarantee at all that I
wouldn't be you know in trouble that way.
And it was
just a part of my persona that I was very
disappointed in
because I it's nobody likes to have that
kind of horrible
little, you know, creature yapping at your
feet waiting to
pounce at any moment. Because melancholy
is horrible and and
dwelling on the worst that can happen and
being a
catastrophist and, you know... But also
just just general
depression um and in fact um so I'm and
and... I did have um I did I have a... I
was
the subject of a of an attack in Paris and
in fact it was the
same the same man I just referred to. And
unfortunately
that led to... um It it really opened the
door... The things that had been
sort of kept at bay suddenly the gates,
the locks broke, and
the gates were open and I went through. I
went into what what
I came to realize was just PTSD, regular
old PTSD, post-traumatic
stress disorder. Which I didn't know what
it was. I just thought
I was going mad and a few years later um
when I heard a
psychiatrist on the radio, I remember I
was hoovering my
bedroom, and I I heard a psychiatrist on
the radio talk
about this feeling of thinking you're
going mad and thinking
that you're jumping off a cliff into an
abyss and there's
nobody can save you. And that is I I just
stopped hoovering. I
thought oh my god he's talking about me.
There's I'm going
into madness and there's nobody gonna stop
me and I realized
then that... um That it was it was an
actual thing it was an
actual thing. And then I a little while
later I discovered
that people who survive near-death
experiences often
have that when you're faced with your own
mortality. It happens
to people who've survived plane crash, who
have um been you
know had a heart attack, they can get this
PTSD survivor
thing you know. It's just too much for
your brain to handle
that you were this close to being killed
but you're not
you know. And I had tasted death at that
time when I was
attacked and I was very close to being to
being killed but I
wasn't. And um I began to get used to this
creature that was big. It
took it took a permanent residence in my
mind and uh it was
unpleasant but it was something I couldn't
get rid of. It just
lived there and it manifested in a kind
of... um It manifested in a
kind of a knot in my in my chest. Time
went by, went to
university, got married, had kids that was
very again it
kept rearing its head when you're bringing
up children on
your own, it's not a good place for people
who have this this
this this weakness. And then in 2012 I
discovered sketching
and needless to say um it occupied my
brain because when
you're struggling to try and draw
something properly it's
flipping hard. You know it looks wrong all
the time and
it's hard
Nic: That's where I'm at
Róisín: It's very hard. It's very hard and
uh all kinds of things happen but it's
very exciting. And I fell in love with
sketching. So I I and I
got addicted so I started sketching a lot.
And um I came back
to Ireland, that was when I was living in
Mauritius, and I came
I came back to Ireland and I kept on
sketching. And
then after about maybe a year or two I
began to notice something
very curious. Once I had been sketching
for about an hour I
would get this sense of calm that would
descend on me
Because
I used to spend hours sketching at the
time. Now I
don't know maybe but at that time I'd just
fallen in love with
sketching, and just like falling in love
with
anybody it's all you want to do. So I was
sometimes four or
five hours more just sketching and I began
to notice this
really strange thing after about an hour I
would get this
feeling of calm and like a flow... Of
course I know now I
was entering the flow state and I realized
that once the flow
state began I I no longer made a mistake.
My drawing would just
happen automatically and it was very
enticing. This was like
what is this magical feeling?" and then
the more I sketched
the faster this state would descend until
about four or
five years in after a lot of sketching it
would happen
automatically as soon as I started. My
brain obviously
developed some kind of a muscle memory and
the second I would
start sketching I would feel the calm. And
then it began to
affect the rest of my life when I wasn't
sketching and the
melancholy went away
Nic: That's wonderful
Róisín: And I don't get it anymore I'm
100% cured
Nic: That's wonderful
Róisín: I know it's a miracle to me.
It's... I had until I was 44
when I started sketching it was something
that was there to a
lot lesser or a greater extent. And I was
able to... And now it's gone so I'm very
grateful. And I I have had many students
say to me they they're
There are people who were a bit like me.
Intense people people
who were struggling mentally in some way
or another and they've
come to me and said "I can't stop
sketching it's midnight I
can't stop and I'm just on a high". I had
one woman not too long
ago who said she said "I've been on
antidepressants for 30
years and I've stopped taking them and why
did nobody ever
tell me that I I can I can sketch instead
why did no one
tell me?" So I do get I do get people
who've got a similar
experience it happens quite a bit
Nic: Yeah well I'm I'm in a similar boat
not quite cured by
any stretch of the imagination but um... I
was um labeled with
treatment resistant depression so for the
last... Since I've been
15-16 I've had ongoing low-grade
depression and then sometimes
really acute and these days the only times
where my brain really
quiets is when I quilt, when I go bird
photographing, and when
I sketch so. um Yeah I I think there's
something to this
whether it's sketching or or exercising
creativity which is
I think
it is I think it's I think that's the
common thread
it's using your hands physically. It
doesn't work if
you're just thinking about it. You have to
use your hands and
it has to be something that you have it
has to be a
problem solving thing whether that's you
know... I don't know
rearing rare insects or whether it's you
know it has to be
something to do with your hands that you
really have to focus
Nic: Yeah
Róisín: And you really have to think. You
have to solve you
have to solve problems. We're humans.
We're built to we're
built to solve problems. Nic: Yeah
and then I think part of it too is you
have to get to that point
where you get to the flow state
Róisín: You do you definitely do I I think
you're right on
that. You do and and and as I explained
for me it came
slowly. It came slowly and um um and and
and and the prowess
as sketching and the improved ability it
came hand in hand with
that and that was its own rewards. And
obviously it helped
my career in many ways but that's
completely separate. The
big gift I had was being fixed and um I
mean I I you know I've
always been a very uh how would I say
ill... It's an uncivic minded
person I I you know I'm I'm ungenerous in
my mind
Ungenerous towards others and and and and
sketching has definitely made me
a much more relaxed and chill and nicer
person. I'm not sure
my husband would tell you the same thing
but I know for a
fact that I've been a very uncivic minded
person for a long time. And I've been...
He's definitely got a nicer wife than he
did before
Nic: You say you're ungenerous and yet you
you give up of your
time, you share about sketching and urban
sketching, and drawing
and you have YouTube and Instagram and and
you're giving of
yourself. How is that ungenerous
Róisín: Well yes maybe I'm very generous
in physical terms
But what I mean is is if I'm if I've
always thought the worst of
people. Like if you know it'd be
mean-minded
mean-minded you know I wouldn't be kind in
my mind, you
know. I'd be mean in my mind. um But now
I'm not so mean right. I'm
becoming a little bit nicer, I think but
that's definitely
You know that phrase they say that um
"damaged people aren't very
pleasant because they're so busy trying to
look after
themselves they don't have time for
others"? I think that would
describe me quite well
Nic: Still now
Róisín: No no no no I'm loving it. I'm
loving it. I'm lovely now. Nic: Well
you are lovely but I... I can't see into
your brains. I can't
see into your mind. I don't know if you're
thinking "oh this
Nic really
Róisín: No no no that's in the past it's
in the past. Nic: What
other creative things do you do? Cartoons,
drawing
sketching... Do you do anything else
Róisín: um I'm a sewer
Yeah
and I designed my sketch pocket. My little
bag for
artists. Oh yeah um so I I don't know
maybe 10, maybe 9
versions. And then when it was taken away
for, you know, mass
manufacture if you like, then there was
more iterations but
they weren't me. They were done by the
factory. um So I sew... um Do
I have any other? uh What else do I do? I
guess I paint and acrylics
and oils but only very occasionally. um
Give me an
example. I mean I do lots of things I'm
just trying to
think about it. I'm just trying to think
about it. I'm just trying to think about
it. I'm... What do I do? I make models. No
used to anything to
do with using your hands I would say. I
don't I don't
knit. I don't crochet. um I like sticking
things. I like I
like cutting things out. I like glue. Oh I
love glue and
scissors. You can't go wrong with glue
scissors and some
nice colorful paper
Nic: So collage
Róisín: Collage I like. I like I like
baking. I like cooking. I
like arranging a house to look nice. um
Yeah lots of things
Nic: Cooking and baking. um I'm starting
to make connections
You said in your comics there's recipes.
Are they actually
recipes for humans to try or are they
recipes for the
characters in your comics to
Róisín: Nope they're genuine actual
recipes and they're
foraged food so... Nic: Oh nice Róisín:
Food you find in the world and I've done
that since I was a teenager. um I used to
pick rose hips and try
and make rose hip syrup. um None of my
brothers and sisters did. And
I've got lots of them I do not know what
they were doing if
they weren't gathering food from the
countryside but I was. um I
was always trying to make my bread rise
and... um My father was a
wonderful bread maker and somehow I don't
know... I do not
know how his bread worked really well and
mine didn't I'm sure
he told me how to do it but it didn't work
so... um You know fruit
jams next week. I'm this week actually
this week I'm going to
pick elder flowers to make some cordial.
um And in next month's
recipe is um I make nettle soup and some
really gorgeous Irish brown
bread and also some nettle pesto and um so
lots of things
with nettles. And then in the first issue
it was sea beet. The
vegetable that grows on the seashore and
it's like chard
If you have chard and it's delicious. It's
delicious. Can
you imagine coming across miles and miles
of free perfect
fresh chard that's just there to be taken
and that's what I did
In... It's only there for about a month.
um But I I took lots and I
even put some in the freezer so I'm very
pleased. And then in
the in the autumn I'll make sloe gin and
I'll do something
with mushrooms probably. When somebody
shows me because I
have no clue. I only... I've... There's
only a couple of mushrooms I'm
familiar with but there's lots of
mushrooms I'd like to I'd
like to learn about so... Nic: You
don't want to mess around with mushrooms
unless you you
actually know what you're doing
Róisín: No I don't want to mess around
mushrooms. I like
being alive
Nic: Bread. Do you do yeasted bread or
sourdough
Róisín: Yeah I do... I don't do sourdough.
I um I did during the
pandemic and um I I made a disaster with
sourdough. I somehow
allowed it to get contaminated with
bacteria but I didn't
know. So I gave myself a gut infection
from... And nobody
tells you that you know
yeah
Everybody was talking about how wonderful
it was, how healthy
but every time I took a bite I would get a
terrible pain and I
thought what's going on? Something's going
on here. But
I've been making yeast bread um for 30, 40
years and I also make soda
bread. So I love I love making bread. I
love making unusual
bread and I love playing with the timing
so that it changes
the fermentation. You know I really like
making fun bread
and now my son makes makes bread as well
Nic: Yeah I've I've been making sourdough
since the start of the
year and I am very careful about my
starter making sure
it's it's healthy
Róisín: It's yeah yeah
Nic: The one thing I'm not mastering yet
is the the baguette
because I think... Róisín: No I haven't
mastered it. I haven't mastered it. I saw
YouTube
recently on making a baguette my son and I
are watching it
and... um I think I think I think it's
it's well obviously it's
possible but it's it's very complicated
Nic: Yeah I was told that because I have a
gas oven and
it's not a commercial oven it's too vented
to hold the steam to
have the right
Róisín: See, that's what I mean. That's
what I mean. I think we just have to go to
the
baker to get our baguette
Nic: Yeah well as I said I live in the
back of beyond. The nearest
baker is an hour and a half from me so
Róisín: Same that's why I started making
yeast bread
because the bread you buy around here is
awful, or it certainly
was 30 years ago. um And you know there's
nothing like the
beautiful smell of bread that's been
rising overnight and this
bubbles and oh it's just beautiful
Nic: Let's get back to comics. You've got
one published. Róisín: I have. Nic: You've
got one coming out. Róisín: Mm-hmm Nic: Do
you know what your third one's gonna
be
Róisín: I I have well the magazine the
comic is called
Wild Atlantic Ink and it comes out once a
month
Nic: Right
Róisín: So you you can buy it locally in
the local shop for a
reduced price because I sort of feel it's
nice for the locals to
be able to buy it. And then you can buy it
as a subscriber so
it goes out all over the world to my
subscribers. And they are
all sent out on the same day. 14th of each
month and that
way no... There's no sneak peeks
beforehand. And then I wait 10
days after the 14th to be sure that
everybody has it and then
I can show people what's in it. That's the
theory anyway. This
month I was so busy. I was teaching in
different parts of
Ireland so I haven't even showed anybody
what's in the
issue that's been out for three weeks.
Three weeks ago I sent
it so. um Like for example I went down to
the shore last week
because I wanted to include the beautiful
wild flowers that are
on the shore at the moment and I was
looking at them, and
they're so beautiful, and I was thinking
"oh how can I present
it in an interesting way?" And I'm again
my father's words "don't
be boring don't be boring" Dad thanks! So
um so then I
suddenly thought I was driving home I was
there by myself and
you know that's okay it's cool um and I
was driving home and
suddenly an idea popped into my head of
how to present it with a
character with a theme so that's the
beauty of this this
this this this project. And and then I
asked um I asked I
asked was it ChatGPT or Claude I can't
remember. I
think it was ChatGPT. I asked ChatGPT to
suggest some
creative uh ways to to to do ideas. um And
I have no shame about that
I should have but I don't. And uh he,
ChatGPT came up with a
brilliant idea. I shouldn't be saying this
because I should
pretend it's my idea. But they mentioned
something about um a
ghost. And I realized that I it just it
just sparked a cool
idea like. I live right next to this big
huge ruined house
and it was built in 1789 and it has been
empty when it was
since it was burnt out in 1920. And the
people who lived there
It has a very very colorful past and, it's
not a nice past
It's it's not the good old days it's the
bad old days
right
It's a tale of poverty and um and and
exploitation of
the locals. But that's... I'm not going to
be miserable I mean
Again my father would say don't be so
miserable. So I was
thinking I could have a ghost who lives in
that house because
people talk about that house being
haunted, and a few people
have talked about they've seen ghosts
there. I don't believe
that, it's not... That's not the point.
I'm going to have a character
who lives there. He's a ghost and he's
exploring the area. And
I don't know yet what I'm going to do but
how fun is it to have
your own comic that you can make up any
old crap you want and
you can just allow these characters to
take on a life of
their own. They exist in your mind. I'm
lucky enough to be
able to draw exactly how I want something
to look really
really fast. I have all the tools I have a
beautiful
studio I have the time so I feel like all
my Christmases and
Easters have suddenly arrived
Nic: That's wonderful
Róisín: I'm so happy
Nic: Before we wrap up is there anything
you want to share that
I didn't ask or you think we should talk
about
Róisín: Okay um well I think it's very
interesting about um
identifying as an artist and I... I
look... I don't know is it a
male versus female thing. A man's career
is his
identity. A woman's career, and don't
shoot me, is as a mother
That's our biological purpose and I have
very strong feelings
about that. um And I do believe that women
have been sold a pop
that, you know, a career is just
obviously... You know a lot of
people want kids and can't have them. A
lot of people don't want
kids. You know it's different for
everybody
but this idea of identifying as something
with a name in it... I
don't know if it well... I can only speak
personally with
authority. For me it just wasn't a thing
it just wasn't a
thing. I'm just me. I'm just me. I'm not a
artist, I'm not a
mom, I'm not a, you know, you don't have
to put a label on
yourself
Nic: Yeah
Róisín: um So so and yet people think they
do. And for my
husband that's very important. He... He
was an oceanographer
He's no longer an oceanographer. This is
what he says
but it's a thing you know it's a thing
um So so from identity purposes yeah I do
see... I do
see people wanting to call themselves a
thing. um I'm I I and
it's like it's like in urban sketching
they say drawn
draw verbs not nouns. I would say I'm a
I'm a verb I'm not a
noun. I'm a doing. I'm not a being. I'm
definitely a doing
not a being. So yeah I think you don't
need labels you just
have to you know do
Nic: You are what you do
Róisín: You are what you do yeah well I'm
a doing for
sure. Yeah um and I suppose the last thing
I would say is that
it's it's a massive privilege to be
healthy settled
financially secure enough that I can take
some risks. Creative
risks and to have access to social media
so that I can
actually share the joy and the wonder and
the the the the passion of
creativity. um And to inspire other people
and maybe get them out
of the the the the holes sometimes life
throws us at us
through creativity as people have done for
me. As Danny
Gregory did. As Hergé did. As all the
incredible people that I
follow online and listen to their podcasts
and all those
people who have shared so generously um
and have changed my
life. Guy Raz is another one I just adore
Guy Raz and I just love him and his
podcast. um So I'm just pass it on a
little bit I suppose and uh and
it's just it's an honor it's a it's an
honor to be asked to
talk about it and to share it and
Nic: So social media. Where can people
find you? Where can
people find subscription info for getting
your comics and
seeing all you
Róisín: Sure okay well my comic is on my
website roisincure
com and you'll find it under I think under
membership. My my webmaster has put it
under membership so you
know. I don't think it's on the home page.
You might have to dig
around a little to find it and it at the
moment it costs 10 euros
99 delivered on your doormat every month.
um And then you can
get it for slightly cheaper if you buy the
the year the year
subscription. um I was putting up reels
every single day since
early January as I mentioned and it's not
that I've run out
of steam it's not that I've been burnt out
but I can't even
scroll anymore because I'm doing a comic
all the time
Nic: Yeah
Róisín: 16 pages every single month that's
one... It suddenly
hit me that's that's a page per two days!
Help but. um That's what
I've chosen and you know I am a fast I'm a
fast worker so I
think it's going to be okay. So Instagram
Róisín Curé
YouTube Róisín Curé. uh Where else am I?
TikTok I've just
started. I've stopped now but for a few
weeks there I was
wasting time on TikTok. Not going to do
that anymore. And um so
it's just my name on all all the
platforms, you know. um I don't do
Threads, I don't do BlueSky. What else do
I not do? uh Anyway
Instagram YouTube those are my principal
ones and if you've
got a lot of time on your hands then go to
YouTube and you
won't be looking up for a lot of time. So
I think it's time same as Instagram
there's
a lot of stuff there
Nic: It's all good stuff too
Róisín: Thank you
Nic: Thank you so much for opening
yourself and chatting
with me and sharing all those insights I
really enjoyed that
Róisín: Oh, thank you, Nic, and likewise I
really enjoyed
talking to you and you know don't be a
stranger reach out
anytime I always love to
Nic: I will be sure to do that, thank you
Róisín: Thank you so much
Nic: If you enjoyed this episode if you
were inspired in
any way or if you learned something please
leave a rating
or review on Apple Podcasts on Spotify or
whatever podcast
aggregator you use. Ratings and reviews
really do help. Thank
you. And that's it! I'm Nic Steenhout,
this is The Work
Between. If this sounds like the kind of
conversation you enjoy, like
subscribe, and I'll see you in the next
episode